welcome back to New Mexico Wildlife I'm
Bob Gerty the Gila River is now home to
native Gila trout thanks to years of
hard work by the New Mexico Department
of Game and Fish and a host of other
state and federal wildlife conservation
agencies but now that the fish are back
in their native waters they're getting
some much-needed help where they can
hide from the Predators
it's a small corridor near the Gila
wilderness in southern New Mexico called
Black Canyon Creek this group of
volunteers is ready to do some work in
the stream but first a few words of
warning how to take it easy kind of
watch your step everywhere it's a little
early for snakes and other biting
critters this time of year but just kind
of be careful if you're placing your
hands somewhere just kind of be careful
on those state environment workers in
the Silver City field office say their
aim is to restore vegetation in the area
in hopes of decreasing water
temperatures along this reach of the
Gila River part of that work includes
planting willow cuttings in the riparian
stream corridor as you can see some of
these areas have a pretty wide and
shallow stream channel and what the
willows will do is actually stabilize
some of these cut banks especially this
cut Bank immediately below me and
decrease the lateral erosion into some
of these productive wetland and
agricultural areas willows also provide
shade cover since we're interested in
arresting or restoring this water
temperature impaired stream canopy cover
is going to be an important part of
reducing the amount of solar radiation
that hits the water surface lower water
temperatures mean a much healthier trout
population and that's good news for
people like Charles Muller who has
fished for a patchy trout and golden
trout but there's one fish he's still
waiting to catch still waiting the fish
for the Gila trout Charles is a member
of the Mesilla Valley fly fishers
Association a club that works closely
with New Mexico Game and Fish supporting
efforts to help restore the streams of
the Gila I just hope that there's more
what we're doing here well inspire other
people to do the same thing we're doing
sometimes you can if it's really hard
you can work it in and it'll go better
that way through a combination of
monitoring and assessment the state
evaluates the Gila tributaries every 7
years tracking water temperatures using
survey equipment we basically installed
temperature data loggers which record
the temperature on a on an hourly
interval during the summer months it's
just wide and really shallow and we like
it to have a little more velocity
and then have some deeper holes for
trout and so we're kind of we're gonna
let it happen naturally we're just kind
of help helping it out a little bit on
this particular day Tania Brummett
directs the volunteers in proper log
movement in placement the log movement
and placement is to try to break up some
of these areas that are wide and flowing
very shallow what that does is when you
have a shallow wide flowing stream that
it increases the temperature of the
water quite a bit especially when
there's not enough shade this area is a
native area for Gila trout but because
of the groups work to improve the water
quality here it is also a recovery area
for Gila trout the cool thing that's
going on out here right now actually
with the Gila trout is that because of
these efforts and efforts of others to
try to protect the native population
we've actually recovered it to a point
where we can allow catch and release
fishing for part of the year on this
northern part of Black Canyon Creek from
July 1st through the end of October
fishing enthusiasts like Charles Muller
can now cast a line in Black Canyon
Creek it's just a different species and
you like to go after it
just like a hunter would like to go
after different types of species a
fisherman likes to try to do that too
people can come up here and actually
catch a native Gila trout and that's a
really a pretty exciting thing for Game
and Fish as well as for anglers and for
the Forest Service